I decided to watch that <a href="https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2018/9/7/17832024/obama-speech-trump-illinois-transcript">Obama speech</a> at UIUC and, first of all, it was beautiful and very well written. It's obvious that Obama cares deeply about this country and that we probably agree far more than we disagree on domestic policy, at least in the short term. He seems like a fucking great dude. It's also very clear to me that his brand of politics needs to die. 

His ideal America is governed by a diverse, virtuous, and qualified cadre of technocratic elites, elected by citizens whose civic responsibilities start and end at the ballot box. This is the America our Founding Fathers imagined, and it's a really really shitty vision. In addition to being deeply paternalistic and undemocratic (at least if you think real democracy entails inclusive and open decisionmaking), it's basically asking to get subverted by any sufficiently motivated death cult (see <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Republican_Party_(United_States)">the Republican Party</a>).

At my most cynical, I think he sees politics as a performance, sees Washington as a prominent stage from which the ruling class can show Americans *the way things ought to be done and the way we ought to behave*. And while his eight-year-long West Wing reenactment was a matter of life and death for millions of people with essentially no voice outside of election years (and even then mehhh), it wasn't like anything really bad was going to happen because, hey, he was a good guy, and he was calling the shots. It seemed sometimes like he genuinely believed that, as president, the best thing he could do to make America better was to just inspire Americans to be better. Lacking such a platform, the average American, and by that I mean someone who didn't make a career out of politics, really could only be expected to engage politically by reading the newspaper and voting every few years. You're either on stage or you're the audience. And frankly, why challenge that system when the people up there are like super cool... I mean look at them. (Note: on my more generous days, I think he just believes politics is a vocation to which only the very best are called... this has more or less the same consequences for my argument.)

So the most important thing to him, according to my amateur psychoanalysis, was *to do his job as it's supposed to be done*. Hence the focus of his administration on optics and process over firm policy goals. This also explains his repeated attempts to reach out to Republicans who were obviously uninterested in compromise and his administration's elevation of deeply cynical and self-serving experts with great looking resumes. I have to admit though, there was and still is something very compelling about his vision and the undeniable quality of his performance (for maybe the same reasons we get really into super heroes and Confucianism), particularly at a time when we’re governed by such essentially mediocre human beings.

In any case, this means that Obama doesn't really oppose Republicans on the grounds that they want to plunder the commons, murder your sick relatives, and live forever off of your literal blood, but because they don't demonstrating levels of personal virtue commensurate with their positions. They're acting poorly. Unfortunately for a lot of innocent victims though, it’s entirely possible to square personal virtue (at least as we conceive of it in America) with all sorts of terrible shit, up to and including material contributions to mass murder — as long of course as it’s couched in the proper rhetorical and ideological forms (see <a href="https://lukeoneil.substack.com/p/god-will-punish-them">this piece</a> by Luke O'Neil).

Conservatives, for their part, understand very well the stakes of politics. They’re deeply conscious of power, enforced hierarchy is at the core of their ideology after all, and they're entirely willing to wield it, unjudiciously, unfairly, dishonorably (for whatever value you place on that word), in order to defend a status quo that benefits them. The Republican Party has been for decades entirely dedicated to dismantling and defanging its opposition by any means necessary. Its backers perceive an existential threat, know in their bones that they have no place in a better world.

<a href="http://coreyrobin.com/">Corey Robin</a> has been predicting another great realignment of the American political landscape. Maybe he’s right, I certainly hope so. It's definitely the case that if self-described Democrats start to embrace a different conception of politics, one whose object is power (in Washington, in the workplace, in the home, on the street), whose activity is the building of power (by whatever means we have), and whose goal is the emancipatory redistribution of power (from the wealthy corporate donor, the abusive boss, the entitled man, the aggro cop), things are going change very quickly. But this won't come without moving past Obama, defining a notion of political righteousness beyond personal or professional ethics, justice beyond redistribution, and participation beyond the ballot box.

From the speech: "If you don't like what's going on ... Do not complain. Don't hashtag. Don't get anxious. Don't retreat. Don't binge on whatever it is you're binging on. Don't lose yourself in ironic detachment. Don't put your head in the sand. Don't boo. Vote. Vote." I guess I'm asking you to imagine a future where instead of “vote” — such an anemic, condescending demand, and one so clearly mediated by a vast, almost unbridgeable difference in political agency — we said to one another “organize (and I’ll help figure out childcare at the meetings).”

Also, this Cory Doctorow <a href="https://locusmag.com/2018/09/cory-doctorow-big-tech-we-can-do-better-than-constitutional-monarchies/
">essay</a> in Locus feels super relevant to what I'm saying here. It's definitely worth a read.